Updates for gateway deprecation 10/21 (#5266)
MystenLabs/sui: doc/src/build/fullnode.md

---
title: Run a Sui Full node
---

> Sui Full nodes run a service that stores the full blockchain state and history. They service reads, either for end clients or by helping other Full nodes get up-to-date with the latest transactions that have been committed to the chain.

Reviewer: it's not accurate to say it stores the *full* blockchain data. Also it's worth calling out FN validates blockchain data.
`by helping other Full nodes get up-to-date with the latest transactions that have been committed to the chain.` this is WIP but not yet happening. 

```suggestion
Sui Full nodes run a service that validates blockchain activities, including transactions, checkpoints, and epoch changes etc. It stores and services the queries for the blockchain state and history.
```

> This role enables [validators](../learn/architecture/validators.md) (or miners in
> other networks) to focus on servicing the write path and processing transactions as fast as possible. Once a validator has committed a new set of transactions (or a block of transactions), the validator will push that block to a Full node (potentially a number of Full nodes) who will then in turn disseminate it to the rest of the network.

Reviewer: ditto 
```suggestion
This role enables [validators](../learn/architecture/validators.md) (or miners in
other networks) to focus on servicing the write path and processing transactions as fast as possible. Once a validator has committed a new set of transactions (or a block of transactions), the validator will push that block to connected Full nodes who will then service the queries from clients.
```

## Features

Sui Full nodes:

* Track and verify the state of the blockchain, independently and locally.
* Serve read requests from clients.

> * Conduct local app testing against verified data.

Reviewer: what is `Conduct local app testing against verified data.`?

Author: Unsure, this was existing content. Will remove

## State synchronization

Sui Full nodes sync with validators to receive newly committed transactions.

> A transaction requires a few round trips to 2f+1 validators to be able to form a TxCert, at which point a transaction is guaranteed to be committed and executed.

Reviewer: better to use full name for `TxCert` ?

`at which point a transaction is guaranteed to be committed and executed.` is not 100% accurate as well. I think this finality topic perhaps deserves a separate page

This synchronization process is performed by:

1. Following 2f+1 validators and listening for newly committed transactions.

> 1. Requesting the transaction from one validator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Making sure the transaction is recognized by 2f+1 validators and hence reaches finality.
```

1. Locally executing the transaction and updating the local DB.

This synchronization process is far from ideal as it requires listening
to at a minimum 2f+1 validators to ensure that a Full node has properly seen all
new transactions. Over time, we will improve this process (e.g. with the

> introduction of checkpoints, ability to synchronize with other Full nodes,

Reviewer: checkpoints is already there. cc @lxfind / @mystenmark  to provide a paragraph here

## Full node setup

Follow the instructions here to run your own Sui Full node.

### Hardware requirements

We recommend the following minimum hardware requirements for running a Full node:

* CPUs: 2
* RAM: 8GB
* Storage: 50GB

### Software requirements

> We recommend running Sui Full nodes on Linux. The Sui team supports the Ubuntu and

Reviewer: "The Sui team supports" sounds a bit weird
